TITLE: Hocuspocus (1953 film)

Hocuspocus () is a 1953 West German comedy crime film directed by Kurt Hoffmann and starring Curt Goetz, Valerie von Martens (his wife) and Hans Nielsen. Based on Goetz's own play from 1926 and on the first movie of 1930 of which an English-language version was made at the same time, it was remade in 1966 in color as Hocuspocus.

It was shot at Göttingen Studios. The film's sets were designed by the art director's Kurt Herlth and Hermann Warm.

Plot 

After unsuccessful painter Hilmar Kjerulf has disappeared, interest in his paintings rises, until his soft-spoken widow Agda Kjerulf is accused to have murdered her husband by drowning him in a lake. A mysterious person warns the court president that somebody wants to kill him, and he sends a telegram to his friend and lawyer, Mr. Graham in London, to come for support. The night before the court session that likely will sentence her, a surprise visitor shows up at night and seemingly provides ample evidence that Mr. Graham, knowing about the terms in the testament, has the intention to take advantage of that, having bought a ticket well before he received the telegram. After making his point that things are not always as they may seem, as simple sleight of hand "hocuspocus" tricks and a forged date on a ticket apparently had convinced the judge within minutes that his long-term friend has evil intentions, the visitor declares that he is Peer Bille, a former circus artist and jurist, and that he will defend poor and innocent Mrs. Kjerulf because her lawyer has stepped down.

Cast 
Curt Goetz as Peer Bille
Valerie von Martens as Agda Kjerulf
Hans Nielsen as court president
Ernst Waldow as prosecutor
Erich Ponto as Mr. Arthur Graham
Elisabeth Flickenschildt as witness Kiebutz
Joachim Teege as witness Eunano
Margrit Ensinger
Mila Kopp
Fritz Rasp as attendant
Tilo von Berlepsch
Fritz Brandt

References

Bibliography
 Thomas Elsaesser & Michael Wedel. The BFI companion to German cinema. British Film Institute, 1999.

External links 

at filmportal.de

1953 films
1950s crime comedy films
German crime comedy films
West German films
German-language films
German black-and-white films
German films based on plays
Films based on works by Curt Goetz
Remakes of German films
German courtroom films
Films about fictional painters
1953 comedy films