TITLE: Newham Collegiate Sixth Form Centre

Newham Collegiate Sixth Form Centre, also known as The NCS, is a free school sixth form college located in East Ham, London, England. Administered by the City of London Academies Trust, it was opened in 2014. The college is coeducational and is affiliated with University College London  who is a strategic partner. It is rated “Outstanding” by Ofsted. It has an ALPS 1 score for value added.

Curriculum 
The NCS specialises in the teaching of Maths and the Sciences, and contains nine labs that are equipped to a high standard for studying the Sciences (Biology, Chemistry and Physics). The centre offers the following A Level courses:
Biology, Chemistry, Economics, English Literature, Further Maths, Geography, Government and Politics, History, Maths, Physics, Psychology and Religious Studies.  They also provide a super curriculum to extend knowledge beyond the A Level syllabus and introduce students to topics they might not otherwise be engaged with.

Campus
The college is located in a Grade II listed former council building. Surrounding their buildings on the same campus is East Ham Leisure Centre and Library.

Specialist Support 
The NCS provides specialist support in the sectors of Medicine, Law, Finance and Engineering.

Technology 
The NCS is notable for a 1-1 deployment of Apple iPads for all students and staff. Outside of other benefits, the sixth form has credited this and some forward planning to allow live A Level lessons to continue on the very first day that schools were forced to close as part of the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.

Partnerships and programmes
Working with Newham Council, the NCS is the academic A Level centre of a group of partner secondary schools in the borough. These schools are Cumberland, Kingsford, Lister, Little Ilford, Plashet, Rokeby, Royal Docks, Sarah Bonnell and Stratford School Academy.

On 12 November 2014 UCL announced a strategic partnership with Newham Collegiate Sixth Form Centre. The partnership aligns with the aims of UCL 2034, reflecting UCL’s commitment to being a publicly engaged institution with an interest in the education of London students.

Guest speakers have included Natalie Bennett, Owen Jones, Ed Miliband, Sir Win Bischoff, Gina Miller, Dr Aziz Aboobaker, Annabel Port, Stephen Timms MP, Dr Kenneth Tong, Dr George McGavin, , Simon Singh, Shami Chakrabarti, Lord Mervyn King, Robert Winston, Ed Miliband, Venki Ramakrishnan, Evan Davis and Sir Robin Wales.

Ivy League Success 
In total NCS has secured its students 9 offers to Ivy League universities, five from the 2020 cohort alone. This includes the first student from the London Borough of Newham to attend MIT in Boston.

External inspections
Newham Collegiate was inspected by Ofsted in October 2021 and judged to be an Outstanding education provider in all areas. Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector Amanda Spielman noted this was the first outstanding judgement reached since Ofsted returned to the full inspection framework after the temporary changes introduced during the covid pandemic. Writing to the school she said:“This is a tremendous achievement by you and your team. Not only does the inspection framework set a high bar for being judged outstanding, but you have achieved this in the context of all the disruption caused by COVID-19. I hope that you and your whole school community are very proud.”The report of Newham Collegiate said:“Learners at Newham Collegiate Sixth Form Centre benefit from studying in an environment dedicated to academic excellence.”

"Learners enjoy the challenge of meeting the high expectations set for them by their teachers. They benefit from their teachers’ high levels of subject expertise which allows them to learn, not only the content of their A-level syllabus, but also knowledge beyond that required for their examinations.”

"Learners benefit from leaders' expertise in preparing them to make successful applications to the most competitive universities and apprenticeship pathways.”

“[Learners] enjoy attending additional sessions in which they have the opportunity to study undergraduate level content, and develop their skills in independent enquiry, critical thinking and debate. Consequently, learners are well-prepared for their future studies.”

"Learners appreciate the opportunity to engage with current issues and to develop their skills in proposing, debating and critical thinking.”

References

2014 establishments in England
Education in the London Borough of Newham
Educational institutions established in 2014
Free schools in London
Grade II listed buildings in the London Borough of Newham