TITLE: Tiffany Cross

Tiffany D. Cross (born February 6, 1979) is an American journalist, television personality, political analyst, and author. She is the host of The Cross Connection, a Saturday morning MSNBC show.

Early life and education

Cross was born in Ohio. She grew up between Cleveland, Ohio and Atlanta, Georgia. When she was a teenager, she wanted to be the "brown Murphy Brown".

She attended Clark Atlanta University where she majored in Mass Communications with an emphasis on radio, television, and film.

Career

Cross' first journalism job was as a reporter at an Atlanta radio station. Eventually, she worked for CNN as an associate producer in the 2000s. She was also the Washington, D.C. bureau chief for BET Networks. She later became a resident fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School's Institute of Politics. Cross also made regular appearances on MSNBC, most notably on AM Joy with Joy Reid.

In July 2020, her book Say It Louder: Black Voters, Our Voices, and the Shaping of American Democracy was published. That same month, Joy Reid's new weekday show, The ReidOut started and Cross became one of a handful of rotating guest hosts of AM Joy. As of August, Cross, Jonathan Capehart and Zerlina Maxwell were being considered for the weekend slot by MSNBC. Months later, in December, Cross was named host of a new, two hour show on MSNBC, Cross Connection (often stylized as Crosstalk), replacing Reid's AM Joy Saturday slot, with Capehart taking the Sunday slot and Maxwell hosting her own show on NBC Peacock.

Works
Say It Louder!: Black Voters, Our Voices, and the Shaping of American Democracy. New York: Amistad (2020).

References

External links

1979 births
Living people
African-American television hosts
American women television journalists
Clark Atlanta University alumni
African-American journalists
MSNBC people
African-American women writers
American women non-fiction writers
American political journalists
American women television presenters
Journalists from Washington, D.C.
Journalists from Georgia (U.S. state)
Writers from Atlanta
BET Networks
21st-century American journalists
21st-century American women writers
21st-century American non-fiction writers