TITLE: El Meson Sandwiches

El Meson Sandwiches (marketed in Florida as Meson Sandwiches) is a fast-casual restaurant chain that primarily sells sandwiches, salads and breakfast items, which it serves all day long. Based in Mayagüez, Puerto Rico, El Meson Sandwiches is Puerto Rico's largest restaurant chain. In 2012 it was named one of the world's top fast food chains by Travel & Leisure magazine.

El Meson Sandwiches is family-owned and operated. It has 37 locations in Puerto Rico and three in Florida, at the Florida Mall, in Kissimmee and Lee Vista Promenade.

El Meson began franchising in 2018. El Meson Sandwiches units average $2 million in sales per year. System-wide sales in 2015 were just under $80 million.

History

The first El Meson Sandwiches opened in 1972 in the beach town of Aguadilla on Puerto Rico's northwestern tip. The restaurant was started by Felipe Perez Sr., father of the current CEO, Felipe Pérez Grajales. The original restaurant was known primarily for two things: home-style sandwiches and a familial atmosphere.

Many of El Meson's early customers were American surfers who came early in the day asking for big, healthy breakfasts. Their requests prompted Perez Sr. to create a sandwich dubbed The Surfer, which comes stuffed with fresh vegetables and soy-based protein. The second Puerto Rico location opened in 1987, shortly after the younger Perez returned from college in Jacksonville, Florida. Rapid growth followed.

Products

El Meson sandwiches are mostly served on criollo bread, a sweet, French-style bread with a Caribbean flavor. Most are pressed on a hot grill and served with cabbage, tomatoes, and mayo. The Delicioso sandwich comes with turkey and bacon. The White House is grilled with roast beef, turkey and mushrooms. El Meson also serves sandwiches on baked potatoes.

Current leadership

Felipe Pérez Grajales is the current CEO of El Meson Sandwiches. He was born in 1965, the eldest of three brothers. From the early 1970s through his high school years, Grajales worked in the original El Meson restaurant in Aguadilla. In 1983 he left Puerto Rico to attend Jacksonville University. Though he received several offers from companies in the U.S., he returned to Puerto Rico in 1986 to help expand the family business.

Grajales has been recognized as an outstanding businessman by Ernst & Young, the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, the Sales & Marketing Executives (SME) Association, and the House of Representatives and Senate of Puerto Rico.

He was president of the Organizing Committee for the 2010 Central American and Caribbean Games in Mayagüez in 2010 and is president of the Mayagüez 2010 Foundation.

References

External links
 Meson Sandwiches Official Website
 Puerto Rican El Meson Sandwiches Website (In Spanish)

1972 establishments in Puerto Rico
Restaurants in Puerto Rico
Mayagüez, Puerto Rico
Privately held companies of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rican brands
Restaurants established in 1972