TITLE: Scott Perry (politician)

Scott Gordon Perry (born May 27, 1962) is an American politician. He is the U.S. representative for . It was numbered the 4th district from 2013 to 2019. It includes Harrisburg, York and most of the inner suburbs.

A member of the Republican Party, Perry represented the 92nd district in the Pennsylvania House of Representatives from 2007 to 2013. He is a retired Pennsylvania Army National Guard brigadier general. In November 2021, Perry was elected chairman of the House Freedom Caucus, the most conservative group among U.S. House Republicans.

On December 20, 2021, the House panel investigating the January 6 Capitol attack called for an interview with Perry – the first time it publicly sought to question a sitting member of Congress. Perry emphatically declined the request the next day. The panel's chairperson said it had evidence from several witnesses that Perry had "an important role" in efforts to install Justice Department official Jeffrey Clark as acting attorney general.

Early life and education
Perry was born in San Diego, California. His family moved to Dillsburg, Pennsylvania, a suburb of York, when he was seven. In 1980, he graduated from Northern High School in Dillsburg and Cumberland-Perry Vo-Tech School in York County, Pennsylvania. In 1991, Perry obtained a B.S. in business administration and management from Pennsylvania State University. In July 2012, he received a master's degree in strategic planning from the United States Army War College.

Military service

Army National Guard
Perry began his military career in 1980 when he enlisted in the Pennsylvania Army National Guard. He attended basic training at Fort Dix, New Jersey, and graduated from Advanced Individual Training at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, as a technical drafting specialist. He graduated from Pennsylvania's Officer Candidate School and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Field Artillery.

After receiving his commission, Perry qualified as a helicopter pilot in the Aviation branch. He served in a variety of staff and command assignments as he advanced through the ranks, including executive officer of 1st Squadron, 104th Cavalry Regiment during deployment to Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2002–3, and commander of 2nd Battalion (General Support), 104th Aviation Regiment beginning in 2008.

Iraq war
In 2009–10, Perry commanded 2nd Battalion, 104th Aviation Regiment during its pre-deployment training and service in Iraq for Operation Iraqi Freedom. As Task Force Diablo, 2-104th Aviation was credited with flying 1,400 missions, accruing over 13,000 combat flight hours, and transporting over 3 million pounds of cargo and 43,000 soldiers and civilians. Perry was credited with flying 44 missions and accrued nearly 200 combat flight hours.

Post-Iraq

After returning from Iraq, Perry was promoted to colonel and assigned to command the Pennsylvania National Guard's 166th Regiment (Regional Training Institute) (2010–12). From 2012 to 2014, he commanded the garrison at the Fort Indiantown Gap National Training Center. In May 2014, Perry was assigned as one of the assistant division commanders of the 28th Infantry Division, and he was promoted to brigadier general in November 2015. In May 2016, he was assigned as assistant adjutant general for Army at the Pennsylvania National Guard's Joint Force Headquarters. Perry retired from the Pennsylvania National Guard on March 1, 2019.

Business career
In 1993, Perry founded Hydrotech Mechanical Services, Inc., a mechanical contracting firm in Dillsburg. The firm provides contract construction and maintenance services to municipal and investor-owned utilities from North Carolina to New York, specializing in large meter calibration. In 2002, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection accused the company of altering sewage monitoring reports while doing work for the Memphord Estates Sewage Treatment Company. Perry faced criminal charges of conspiring to falsify state-mandated sewage records. In the aftermath of the investigation and review, he was allowed to complete a diversion program and avoid any criminal charges, which allowed him to maintain his U.S security clearance.

Pennsylvania House of Representatives

Elections
In 2006, state representative Bruce Smith of Pennsylvania's 92nd House district decided to retire. Perry won the Republican primary with 41% of the vote. He won the general election with 71% of the vote, and took office on January 2, 2007. In 2008, Perry was reelected to a second term unopposed. In 2010, he was reelected to a third term unopposed.

Committee assignments

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

2012

In 2012, Perry gave up his state house seat to run for the 4th congressional district. The district had previously been the 19th district, represented by six-term incumbent Republican Todd Platts, who was giving up the seat to honor a self-imposed term limit. In 2010, when Platts wanted to become U.S. Comptroller General, he spoke to Perry about running for the seat.

Perry won a seven-way primary with over 50% of the vote. Although outspent nearly 2 to 1 in the campaign, he beat his closest competitor with nearly three times as many votes. Political newcomer Harry Perkinson, an engineer, advanced in a two-way Democratic primary. Perry won the general election, 60%–34%.

2014

In 2014, Perry was unopposed in the Republican primary and the former Harrisburg mayor, Linda D. Thompson, was unopposed in the Democratic primary. Perry won the general election, 75%–25%.

2016

Perry won the 2016 election with no primary challenge and no official Democratic opponent. Joshua Burkholder of Harrisburg, a political novice, withdrew from the Democratic primary after too many signatures on his qualifying petition were successfully challenged. His subsequent write-in candidacy won the Democratic primary, but he was unaffiliated in the general election. Perry defeated Burkholder, 66%–34%.

2018

After ruling the state's congressional map an unconstitutional gerrymander, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court issued a new map for the 2018 elections. Perry's district was renumbered the 10th and made significantly more compact than its predecessor. It lost most of the more rural and Republican areas of York County to the neighboring 11th district (the old 16th). To make up for the loss in population, it was pushed slightly to the north, absorbing the remainder of Democratic-leaning Dauphin County that had not been in the old 4th. On paper, the new district was less Republican than its predecessor. Had the district existed in 2016, Donald Trump would have won it with 52% of the vote to Hillary Clinton's 43%; Trump carried the old 4th with 58% of the vote.

Pastor and Army veteran George Scott won the Democratic primary by a narrow margin and opposed Perry in the general election for the reconfigured 10th. The two debated in October before Perry won with 51.3% of the vote to Scott's 48.7%, with the new district boundaries taking effect in 2019. Perry held on by winning the district's share of his home county, York County, by 11,600 votes. This was the district's closest race since 1974, when Bill Goodling won his first term in what was then the 19th with 51% of the vote.

2020

In 2020, Perry had no Republican primary challenge, and the Pennsylvania auditor general, Eugene DePasquale, won a two-way Democratic primary. Perry was reelected with 53% of the vote in the general election.

Tenure
Perry is a member of the Freedom Caucus. In November 2021, he was elected to chair the group, succeeding Andy Biggs in January 2022.

In October 2017, in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, Perry accused CNN anchor Chris Cuomo of exaggerating the crisis in Puerto Rico.

In January 2018, Perry suggested that ISIS might have been involved in the 2017 Las Vegas shooting. ISIS claimed responsibility for the attack, but authorities have maintained that gunman Stephen Paddock acted alone.

In December 2019, Perry was one of 195 Republicans to vote against both articles of impeachment against President Trump.

In October 2020, Perry was one of 17 Republicans to vote against a House resolution to formally condemn the QAnon conspiracy theory. He said he voted against the resolution because he was concerned about infringements on free speech, saying, "it's very dangerous for the government ... to determine what is okay to like and what is not okay to like."

In March 2021, Perry voted against the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021. He said only 9% of the act's spending was allotted to defeat the COVID-19 virus, while the rest would advance Democratic policies.

In April 2021, at a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee meeting on immigration, Perry said, "For many Americans, what seems to be happening or what they believe right now is happening is, what appears to them is we're replacing national-born American—native-born Americans to permanently transform the political landscape of this very nation."

In June 2021, Perry was one of 21 House Republicans to vote against a resolution to give the Congressional Gold Medal to police officers who defended the U.S. Capitol on January 6. He cosponsored a bill, introduced the same day, that would give the same medal to police officers without mentioning the attack.

At the June 2021 Republican Pennsylvania Leadership Conference, Perry said Democrats "are not the loyal opposition. They are the opposition to everything you love and believe in" and "want to destroy the country you grew up in", invoking comparisons to Nazis.

Foreign policy
In 2020, Perry voted against the National Defense Authorization Act of 2021, which in part would prevent the president from withdrawing soldiers from Afghanistan without congressional approval.

In March 2021, Perry was one of 14 House Republicans to vote against a measure condemning the Myanmar coup d'état that overwhelmingly passed.

In July 2021, Perry voted against the bipartisan ALLIES Act, which would increase by 8,000 the number of special immigrant visas for Afghan allies of the U.S. military during its invasion of Afghanistan while also reducing some application requirements that caused long application backlogs; the bill passed in the House 407–16.

Immigration
Perry voted against the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2020 which authorized DHS to nearly double the available H-2B visas for the remainder of FY 2020.

Perry voted against the Consolidated Appropriations Act (H.R. 1158) which effectively prohibits ICE from cooperating with Health and Human Services to detain or remove illegal alien sponsors of unaccompanied alien children (UACs).

Involvement with 2020 presidential election
After the 2020 general election, Perry promoted false claims of election fraud.

In December 2020, Perry was one of 126 Republican House members to sign an amicus brief in support of Texas v. Pennsylvania, a lawsuit filed at the United States Supreme Court contesting the results of the 2020 presidential election, in which Joe Biden defeated Trump.

On January 6, 2021, Perry joined Missouri senator Josh Hawley in objecting to counting Pennsylvania's electoral votes in the 2020 presidential election. During the storming of the U.S. Capitol that day, Perry and his congressional colleagues were ushered to a secure location.

Perry reportedly played a role in a December 2020 crisis at the Justice Department in which Trump considered firing acting attorney general Jeffrey Rosen and replacing him with Jeffrey Clark, the acting chief of the civil division of the DOJ. The New York Times reported Perry introduced Clark to Trump because Clark's "openness to conspiracy theories about election fraud presented Mr. Trump with a welcome change from the acting attorney general, Jeffrey A. Rosen, who stood by the results of the election and had repeatedly resisted the president's efforts to undo them." Before the certification of the electoral college vote on January 6, Perry and Clark reportedly discussed a plan in which the Justice Department would send Georgia legislators a letter threatening an investigation into voter fraud and an invalidation of Georgia's electoral votes, even though the DOJ had investigated reports of fraud but found nothing significant, as attorney general Bill Barr had publicly announced weeks earlier. Clark drafted a letter to Georgia officials and presented it to Rosen and his deputy Richard Donoghue. It claimed the DOJ had "identified significant concerns that may have impacted the outcome of the election in multiple States" and urged the Georgia legislature to convene a special session for the "purpose of considering issues pertaining to the appointment of Presidential Electors." Rosen and Donoghue rejected the proposal. In August 2021, CNN reported that Director of National Intelligence John Ratcliffe had briefed top Justice Department officials that no evidence had been found of any foreign powers' interference with voting machines. Clark was reportedly concerned that intelligence community analysts were withholding information and believed Perry and others knew more about possible foreign interference. Clark requested authorization from Rosen and Donoghue for another briefing from Ratcliffe, asserting hackers had found that "a Dominion machine accessed the Internet through a smart thermostat with a net connection trail leading back to China."

On December 20, 2021, House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack chairman Bennie Thompson wrote to Perry asking him to provide information about his involvement in the effort to install Clark as acting attorney general. Thompson believed Perry had been involved in the effort to install Clark, given previous testimony from former acting attorney general Rosen and his deputy Donoghue, as well as communications between Perry and Meadows. Perry declined the request the next day, asserting the committee was illegitimate. Among several text messages to Meadows the committee released on December 14 was one attributed to a "member of Congress" dated January 5 that read "Please check your signal," a reference to the encrypted messaging system Signal. In his letter to Perry, Thompson mentioned evidence that Perry had communicated with Meadows using Signal, though Perry denied sending that particular text message.

Committee assignments 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs
 Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and Nonproliferation
 Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
 Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
 Subcommittee on Aviation
 Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

Caucus memberships
 Freedom Caucus
Second Amendment Caucus

References

External links
 Congressman Scott Perry official U.S. House website
 Scott Perry for Congress
 
 
 

|-

|-

|-

|-

1962 births
21st-century American politicians
American Master Army Aviators
Living people
Members of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives
Members of the United States House of Representatives from Pennsylvania
Military personnel from California
Military personnel from Pennsylvania
National Guard of the United States generals
Pennsylvania Republicans
Pennsylvania National Guard personnel
Smeal College of Business alumni
People from Cumberland County, Pennsylvania
People from York County, Pennsylvania
Politicians from San Diego
Recipients of the Meritorious Service Medal (United States)
Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives
United States Army generals
United States Army War College alumni