TITLE: Diogo Dalot

José Diogo Dalot Teixeira (; born 18 March 1999), known as Diogo Dalot, is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays as a right-back for  club Manchester United and the Portugal national team.

Dalot is a product of the Porto youth system and made his professional debut for the club's  B team in January 2017. He made his first-team debut in a Taça de Portugal game in October 2017. After making eight appearances for Porto, he joined Manchester United in June 2018 for a reported fee of €22 million (£19 million). From October 2020 to June 2021, Dalot was loaned to Italian Serie A club Milan.

Dalot was a youth international and represented Portugal from under-15 to under-21 level. He was a member of the under-17 squad that won the 2016 UEFA European Under-17 Championship. He made his senior international debut for Portugal at UEFA Euro 2020.

Club career

Porto
Born in Braga, Dalot joined Porto's youth system in 2008, aged nine. On 28 January 2017, he made his senior debut with the B team, playing the full 90 minutes in a 2–1 home loss against Leixões for the LigaPro championship.

Dalot first appeared with the first-team in a competitive game on 13 October 2017, starting in a 6–0 away win over Lusitano de Évora for the season's Taça de Portugal. He first played in the Primeira Liga on 18 February 2018, coming on as a 75th-minute substitute in a 5–0 home routing of Rio Ave.

Manchester United
Dalot signed for Premier League club Manchester United on 6 June 2018 on a five-year contract for a fee of £19 million. Upon his arrival in Manchester, coach José Mourinho said that, considering his young age, he was one of the best right-backs around. He made his debut on 19 September 2018 in an away UEFA Champions League group stage match against Swiss side Young Boys, but was unable to have continuity in the team due to an injury sustained in the previous season. His debut in the Premier League happened on December 1 against Southampton in a 2–2 draw On 26 January 2020. Despite Mourinho's sacking and Ole Gunnar Solskjaer being appointed as the new manager, Dalot remained a valuable option: at the end of the season, he had had 23 appearances, 16 of which in the Premier League. During that season, he had a memorable match in Paris, in the Champions League quarter-finals 2 nd leg against PSG, where Manchester United completed a remarkable comeback thanks to a late penalty, won after a shot by Dalot. He scored the second goal in a 6–0 FA Cup win against Tranmere Rovers; it was his first goal for United.

During his first seasons for the club, Dalot struggled with various injuries and following the arrival of Aaron Wan-Bissaka, his performances were severely limited under manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer.

Loan to AC Milan
Following sporadic use by Manchester United, Dalot was loaned to Italian Serie A side AC Milan for the 2020–21 season. He made his debut for Milan on 22 October, starting in a 3–1 win against Celtic in a UEFA Europa League group stage match. Seven days later, Dalot scored his first goal for Milan and provided an assist for compatriot Rafael Leão in a 3–0 home group stage victory in the UEFA Europa League against Sparta Prague. He made his Serie A debut on 1 November, replacing Davide Calabria in the 71st-minute of a 2–1 away win against Udinese. He made his first start in the league in a 2–2 away draw against Genoa. On 7 March 2021, Dalot score his first Serie A goa in a 2–0 away in at Hellas Verona. 

During the season, Dalot's versatility enabled him to play either as a right back and left back. This made him an integral part of Stefano Pioli's team, helping Milan secure second place in the 2020–21 Serie A and qualification for the 2021–22 UEFA Champions League after an eight-year absence. During his spell as a Rossonero, he was able to play regularly, making 33 appearances, scoring two goals and provinding three assists. As often said by Dalot himself, in Italy he was able to improve defensively, without losing his ability to attack.

Return to Manchester United

During the summer of 2021, Manchester United were interested in signing another right-back. Meanwhile, Milan, who were impressed with Dalot during his loan move with the club, began negotiations with Manchester United to sign him on permanent basis. After returning to Manchester United, he impressed coach Ole Gunnar Solskjaer with his performances during pre-season. Borussia Dortmund were also interested in signing him on a loan deal, but he decided to remain at United to compete with Aaron Wan-Bissaka for a starting position. On 22 September, Dalot was given his first start of the season, featuring in a 1–0 home loss to West Ham United in the third round of the EFL Cup. Since then, he has had limited opportunities with two starts and three substitute appearances. He played against Villarreal in a Champions League group stage match after Wan-Bissaka was suspended for two games. 

On 2 December, Dalot was given his first start in the league under interim manager Michael Carrick, putting an impressive performance and creating the second goal in a 3–2 home win over United's rivals Arsenal at Old Trafford. Following the arrival of interim manager Ralf Rangnick, Dalot cemented his place as starter for the club, following his solid performances in the club's next two matches against Crystal Palace and Norwich City.

International career

Youth
Dalot helped Portugal win the 2016 UEFA European Under-17 Championship, scoring twice in five games in Azerbaijan including once in the final against Spain. The same year, he helped the under-19 team reach the quarter-finals of the same competition.

With the under-19s, Dalot participated in the 2017 UEFA European Under-19 Championship, helping finishing as runner-up, after losing in the final to England. For his performances throughout the competition, he was named in the "Team of the Tournament". Dalot played for Portugal at the 2017 FIFA U-20 World Cup, starting in all the matches in an eventual quarter-final exit.

On 10 November 2017, he won his first cap for the Portugal under-21s, starting in a 1–1 away draw against Romania for the 2019 UEFA European Championship qualifiers. In March 2021, Dalot took part in the 2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship. Portugal finished as runners-up after losing in the final 1–0 to Germany.

Senior
On 13 June 2021, Dalot was included in Portugal's squad for UEFA Euro 2020 as a replacement for João Cancelo, who withdrew after testing positive for COVID-19. He made his debut ten days later in the final group game – a 2–2 draw with France in Budapest – in which he replaced Nélson Semedo for the final 11 minutes. On  27 June, Dalot made his first start with the senior national team, in a 1–0 loss to Belgium in the round 16.

In October 2021, he was called up by Portugal and on October 9, he provided two assists, with the first being converted by Cristiano Ronaldo in a 3–0 home win against Qatar.

Style of play
Dalot is a physically strong defender known for his speed, technique and offensive capabilities. He can play as a full-back or winger on either flank, although he usually plays on the right. He is usually deployed as a wing-back on the right but in a more conventional full-back role on the left. As a left-back, he has been praised for his work ethic and defensive awareness. He has good dribbling skill and is noted for his involvement in counter-attacks by making crosses or long passes. His physique enables him to perform well in aerial duels.

Career statistics

Club

International

Honours
Porto
Primeira Liga: 2017–18

Portugal
UEFA European Under-17 Championship: 2016

Individual
UEFA European Under-17 Championship Team of the Tournament: 2016
UEFA European Under-19 Championship Team of the Tournament: 2017

References

External links

Portuguese League profile 
National team data 

1999 births
Living people
Sportspeople from Braga
Portuguese footballers
Association football defenders
FC Porto B players
FC Porto players
Manchester United F.C. players
A.C. Milan players
Primeira Liga players
Liga Portugal 2 players
Premier League players
Serie A players
Portugal youth international footballers
Portugal under-21 international footballers
Portugal international footballers
UEFA Euro 2020 players
Portuguese expatriate footballers
Expatriate footballers in England
Expatriate footballers in Italy
Portuguese expatriate sportspeople in England
Portuguese expatriate sportspeople in Italy