TITLE: The Clan Pt. 2.5: The Final Chapter

The Clan Pt. 2.5: The Final Chapter is the debut studio album and the final part of The Clan series by the South Korean boy group Monsta X. The album was released on March 21, 2017 by Starship Entertainment and distributed by LOEN Entertainment. The album consists of ten songs, including the first single "Beautiful".

The album was re-released under the title Shine Forever on June 19, 2017 with two additional tracks.

Background and release
On March 5, it was confirmed that the group will release their first full album and the final part of The Clan series titled The Clan Pt. 2.5: The Final Chapter, after releasing the first two parts of The Clan series and both extended plays; The Clan Pt. 1 Lost in May 2016 and The Clan Pt. 2 Guilty in October 2016.

On March 21, the lead single "Beautiful" was released along with the full album. The music video for the lead single was also released on Starship's and 1theK's official YouTube channels on the same day.

The initial physical album was released in three versions; Beautiful, Brilliant, and Beside while the repackage was released in two versions; Shine Forever and Complete X-Clan.

Critical reception
The lead single "Beautiful" was described as advancing Monsta X's "signature sound of hip-hop mixed with EDM elements," with particular note of the "powerful rap" with "flawless vocals, especially lead vocalist Kihyun". The lead single of the repackaged album, "Shine Forever" was described as "a natural future bass follow up to the electronic-heavy 'Beautiful'".

Year-end lists

Track listing

Charts

Album

The Clan Pt. 2.5: The Final Chapter

Weekly charts

Monthly chart

Year-end chart

Shine Forever

Weekly charts

Monthly chart

Year-end chart

Songs

Weekly chart

Sales

The Clan Pt. 2.5: The Final Chapter

Shine Forever

Awards and nominations

Release history

See also
 List of K-pop songs on the Billboard charts
 List of K-pop albums on the Billboard charts
 List of Gaon Album Chart number ones of 2017

References

2017 albums
Korean-language albums
Kakao M albums
Monsta X albums
Starship Entertainment albums