TITLE: Eucalyptus olsenii

Eucalyptus olsenii, commonly known as the Woila gum, is a species of small tree that is endemic to a restricted area on the Southern Tablelands of New South Wales. It has smooth bark with rough bark on the lower trunk, lance-shaped to curved adult leaves, flower buds in groups of seven, white flowers and barrel-shaped or urn-shaped fruit.

Description
Eucalyptus olsenii is a tree that typically grows to a height of  high and forms a lignotuber. It has smooth white to cream-coloured bark that is shed in ribbons, sometimes with rough, fibrous or flaky bark at the base of the trunk. Young plants and coppice regrowth have glossy green leaves that are a paler shade on the lower side, egg-shaped to lance-shaped or elliptical,  long and  wide. Adult leaves are the same shade of glossy green on both sides, lance-shaped to curved,  long and  wide on a petiole  long. The flower buds are arranged in leaf axils in groups of seven on an unbranched peduncle  long, the individual buds sessile or on pedicels up to  long. Mature buds are oval,  long and  wide with a conical to beaked operculum. Flowering has been recorded in October and November and the flowers are white. The fruit is a woody, barrel-shaped or urn-shaped capsule  long and  wide
with the valves below the level of the rim.

Taxonomy and naming
Eucalyptus olsenii was first formally described in 1980 by Lawrie Johnsone and Don Blaxell in the journal Telopea. The specific epithet (olsenii) honours Ian Sinclair Olsen, who recognised the species as distinct on a bushwalking expedition lead by Henry Fairlie-Cuninghame who collected the type material.

Distribution and habitat
Woila gum is restricted to mountains north east of Cooma and south of Braidwood, where it grows in woodland in poor soil on steep slopes. It also grows well as an ornamental tree.

References

olsenii
Myrtales of Australia
Trees of Australia
Flora of New South Wales
Plants described in 1980
Taxa named by Lawrence Alexander Sidney Johnson