TITLE: Yosemite Falls

Yosemite Falls is the highest waterfall in Yosemite National Park, dropping a total of  from the top of the upper fall to the base of the lower fall.  Located in the Sierra Nevada of California, it is a major attraction in the park, especially in late spring when the water flow is at its peak.

Sections
The falls consist of three sections:

 Upper Yosemite Fall: The  plunge comprises over half the total drop. Trails from the valley floor and down from other park areas outside the valley lead to both the top and base of Upper Yosemite Fall.  The upper fall is formed by the swift waters of Yosemite Creek, which, after meandering through Eagle Creek Meadow, drop over the edge of a hanging valley in a spectacular and deafening show of force.

 Middle Cascades: Between the two obvious main plunges there are a series of four smaller plunges collectively referred to as the Middle Cascades. Taken together these account for a total drop of , more than twice the height of the Lower Fall. Because of the narrow, constricted shape of the gorge in which these drops occur and the lack of public access, they are rarely noted. Most viewpoints in the valley miss them entirely. Several vantage points for the cascades are found along the Yosemite Falls trail. Several hikers climbing down from the trail towards the cascades have required an expensive helicopter rescue due to steep and slippery terrain and features.

 Lower Yosemite Fall: The final  drop adjacent to an accessible viewing area, provides the most-used viewing point for the waterfalls. Yosemite Creek emerges from the base of the Lower Fall and flows into the Merced River nearby. Like many areas of Yosemite the plunge pool at the base of the Lower Fall is surrounded by dangerous jumbles of talus made even more treacherous by the high humidity and resulting slippery surfaces.

In all but the wettest years, the falls cease flowing altogether in late summer or fall.  A very small number of rock climbers have taken the opportunity to climb the normally inaccessible rock face beneath the falls, although this is an extraordinarily dangerous undertaking; a single afternoon thunderstorm could restart the falls, sweeping the climbers off the face.

Lower Yosemite Fall is easily accessible near the Yosemite Lodge in Yosemite Valley. The top of Upper Yosemite Fall may be reached via a steep, strenuous, and usually crowded  hike beginning near Camp 4 in Yosemite valley. Upper Yosemite Fall may also be reached via the Yosemite Creek Trail from the Tioga Road to the north.

The Ahwahneechee Legend
The main village of the native people of Yosemite Valley, the Ahwahneechee, was located at the base of the falls.

The Ahwahneechee people called the waterfall "Cholock" ("the fall") and believed that the plunge pool at its base was inhabited by the spirits of several witches, called the Poloti. An Ahwaneechee folktale describes a woman going to fetch a pail of water from the pool, and drawing it out full of snakes. Later that night, after the woman had trespassed into their territory, the spirits caused the woman's house to be sucked into the pool by a powerful wind, taking the woman and her newborn baby with it.

See also
List of waterfalls by height

References

External links 
 
World of Waterfalls.com: Yosemite Falls 

Waterfalls of Yosemite National Park
Tiered waterfalls
Waterfalls of Mariposa County, California
Tourist attractions in Mariposa County, California