TITLE: Romaine Sawyers

Romaine Theodore Sawyers (born 2 November 1991) is a Kittitian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for  club Stoke City, on loan from West Bromwich Albion. He plays international football for the Saint Kitts and Nevis national team.

A West Bromwich Albion academy graduate, he had brief spells on loan at Port Vale, Shrewsbury Town and Walsall. He signed with Walsall in July 2013, following his release from West Brom. He played on the losing side in the 2015 final of the Football League Trophy. He was named in League One's PFA Team of the Year for his performances in the 2015–16 season. He joined Brentford in July 2016 and went on to serve as club captain before he returned to West Bromwich Albion for an undisclosed fee in July 2019. He helped the club to win promotion out of the Championship at the end of the 2019–20 season and was also named in the PFA Team of the Year. West Brom were relegated the following year and he was loaned out to Stoke City for the 2021–22 season.

Early life
Sawyers was raised by Diane, a single mother who also raised foster children and did many hours of community work in Birmingham. She remained a big influence on her son, who went on to work closely with the community development teams at his football clubs, as well as with the charity Kick It Out.

Club career

West Bromwich Albion
Sawyers first made the West Bromwich Albion substitute bench for the final game of the 2008–09 season. Following this, he won his first professional contract with the club. However, he spent most of the 2009–10 season nursing a knee injury. On 21 January 2011, he joined Jim Gannon's Port Vale on a one-month loan, along with Kayleden Brown. He made his debut for the League Two club two days later, in a 1–0 defeat to Cheltenham Town at Vale Park, replacing Adam Yates. However this was to be his only game for the club, as the pair returned to The Hawthorns after the loan spell ended with Sawyers having made no further first team appearances.

On 27 January 2012, he joined Graham Turner's League Two Shrewsbury Town on a one-month loan, and the following day he was named as an unused substitute for the 2–0 win at Hereford United. He made his first league start against Torquay United at Plainmoor on 11 February. On 25 February, it was announced his loan had been extended until the end of the 2011–12 season. In total he made two starts and five substitute appearances for Shrewsbury.

Walsall
Sawyers joined League One club Walsall on loan in March 2013; manager Dean Smith said that "He's a talented lad who can play-off the front-man... I know that Albion rate him highly, so it's good to have him on board." He made four substitute appearances for the club. He was released by West Brom in June 2013. Following his release from West Brom, Sawyers signed a permanent one-year deal at Walsall in July 2013; Dean Smith stated that he saw potential and an excellent attitude in the player despite his limited playing time on loan. On 17 August 2013, he marked his first senior start for Walsall with his first goal from 25 yards in a 1–1 draw with Notts County at the Bescot Stadium. He finished the 2013–14 season with seven goals in 49 appearances, and signed a new two-year deal with the club.

On 13 September 2014, he was described as a "shining light throughout" in a 3–1 home win over Preston North End, earning a place on the Football League team of the week. He played in the 2015 final of the Football League Trophy, a 2–0 defeat to Bristol City, which was Walsall's first appearance at Wembley Stadium. In total he scored five goals in 51 appearances in the 2014–15 season, and was praised by manager Smith despite being criticised by some supporters. He won a place on the Football League team of the week after scoring a brace – including a "25-yard rocket into the top corner of the net" – in a 4–0 triumph at Blackpool on 29 August 2015. He was named in League One's PFA Team of the Year for his performances in the 2015–16 season, alongside teammate Rico Henry. He was also nominated for the PFA League One 'Player of the Year', and finished as runner-up to Gillingham's Bradley Dack. He rejected the club's offer a new contract and departed as a free agent at the end of the season.

Brentford
On 1 July 2016, Sawyers signed with Championship club Brentford in a move that reunited him with former Walsall boss Dean Smith. He made his debut for the "Bees" in a 2–1 away defeat to Huddersfield Town on the opening day of the 2016–17 season. He scored his first goal for Brentford in a 2–0 win over West London derby rivals Queens Park Rangers on 28 October. He ended the 2016–17 campaign with three goals in 45 matches, helping Brentford a tenth-place finish as the key link between defence and attack. He scored five goals and contributed five assists in 44 appearances across the 2017–18 season as Brentford finished in ninth position, and was described as "one of the standout players at Griffin Park this season with his touch and passing range impressing many". He was voted Players' Player of the Year by the Brentford squad and was also named as Community Player of the Year.

He was reported to be a transfer target of West Bromwich Albion manager Darren Moore in June 2018. Soon after taking charge at Brentford, new manager Thomas Frank named Sawyers as the new club captain in November 2018. Frank moved Sawyers further down the pitch as part of two central midfielders with Kamohelo Mokotjo rather than as one of three. He made 46 appearances during the 2018–19 season and was linked with a move to Aston Villa in the summer.

Return to West Bromwich Albion
On 27 July 2019, Sawyers returned to West Bromwich Albion, signing a three-year contract after being bought for an undisclosed fee (reported to be £2.9 million); Sawyers stated that "this is the team that I have always wanted to play for". Manager Slaven Bilić said that "we targeted him as a player who will raise the quality in our midfield". He chose to wear the #19 shirt in homage to former midfielder Jason Koumas. On 22 February 2020, he was sent off after putting his hand to the throat of former Walsall teammate Jamie Paterson during a 3–0 win at Bristol City. During break in play due to the COVID-19 pandemic in England, FourFourTwo magazine listed Sawyers as the ninth best player in the EFL. He ended the 2019–20 season with one goal in 43 appearances as the "Baggies" secured the Championship's second automatic promotion place. He was also named in the Championship's PFA Team of the Year.

On 29 December 2020, he scored what The Guardian's Paul Doyle described as a "slapstick own goal" in a 5–0 defeat to Leeds United at The Hawthorns. Sawyers took to Twitter to say that "I take full responsibility for setting the tone for what went on to be a difficult night for us all to stomach!" Sawyers barely featured in the second half of the 2020–21 season as the club suffered relegation under the stewardship of Sam Allardyce.

Loan to Stoke City
On 20 August 2021, Sawyers joined Championship rivals Stoke City on loan for the 2021–22 season. Manager Michael O'Neill stated that "we didn't anticipate that Romaine would become available" but acted quickly to sign Sawyers after he had fallen behind Jake Livermore and Alex Mowatt in the pecking order at West Brom.

International career
Sawyers represented Saint Kitts and Nevis national under-23 football team in the second round of the Caribbean Football Union's qualifying phase for the 2012 CONCACAF Men's Olympic Qualifying Championship. In the three games the team played, he scored four goals. He was called up to the full team for the qualification for the 2012 Caribbean Cup. He scored a goal and claimed an assist on his debut, in a 2–0 win over Anguilla at the Warner Park Sporting Complex in Basseterre.

Style of play
Sawyers has a languid style of play, which can make him appear lazy at times despite statistics indicating a relatively high work rate. He can play as an attacking midfielder, playmaker or as a central midfielder. He played most his career as a 'number 10' under his former manager Dean Smith who managed him at Walsall and Brentford, before being converted into a central midfielder under Manager Thomas Frank at Brentford who also made him captain due to his leadership qualities. Sawyers is known for his ability to dictate games from midfield, his range of passing, and his ability to carry out successful difficult passes and help his team-mates start attacks.

Personal life
In January 2021, a 49-year-old man from Kingswinford was arrested after a racist message was sent to Sawyers on social media during West Brom's loss to Manchester City. In September 2021, the man was jailed for eight weeks.

Career statistics

Club

International

International goals
Scores and results list Saint Kitts and Nevis' goal tally first.

Honours
Walsall
Football League Trophy runner-up: 2014–15

West Bromwich Albion
EFL Championship second-place promotion: 2019–20

Individual
PFA Team of the Year: 2015–16 League One
Brentford Players Player of the Year: 2017–18
Brentford Community Player of the Year: 2017–18
PFA Team of the Year: 2019–20 Championship

References

External links

1991 births
Living people
Citizens of Saint Kitts and Nevis through descent
Saint Kitts and Nevis footballers
Association football midfielders
Saint Kitts and Nevis international footballers
Footballers from Birmingham, West Midlands
English footballers
West Bromwich Albion F.C. players
Port Vale F.C. players
Shrewsbury Town F.C. players
Walsall F.C. players
Brentford F.C. players
Stoke City F.C. players
English Football League players
Premier League players
Black British sportspeople
English sportspeople of Saint Kitts and Nevis descent