TITLE: OCBC Centre

OCBC Centre is a , 52-storey skyscraper in Singapore. serving as the current headquarters of OCBC Bank, the building was completed in 1976 and was the tallest building in the country, and South East Asia, at that time. There are two extensions, OCBC Centre South and OCBC Centre East. There is an Executive Club on one of the higher floors of the building. OCBC Centre East has food and beverage outlets.

History 
OCBC Centre was the result of the second Sale of Sites of the Urban Renewal Department of the Housing and Development Board in 1968.  The building was designed by I. M. Pei & Partners (now Pei Cobb Freed & Partners) together with now defunct BEP Akitek (Pte) Singapore and started construction in 1975. Its construction period was only two years due to a three-tier system. The building was completed on 1 October 1976 and was Southeast Asia's tallest building at the time. A bronze sculpture designed by Tan Teng Kee sat at the building until 1983 when it was moved to the now defunct Bras Basah Park. Large Reclining Figure, a large bronze sculpture by Henry Moore, replaced it in 1984, and a new plaza and reflecting pool were built outside the front entrance of the building. The building has undergone several modernisations and OCBC Centre East and South was constructed at a later date.

Architecture
The building is an example of Brutalist architecture, a popular architectural style in the 1970s.

It is designed to be a symbol of strength and permanence, and its structure consists of two semi-circular reinforced concrete cores as well as three lateral girders which helped make construction faster. The building is divided into three sections due to the steel trusses being  constructed off-site and were put into position. Each section consists of floors that are cantilevered 6 metres from each column, with load transfer girders spanning at each end taking up boxed sections of the pre-stressed concrete. Lattice steel models strengthened by steel and  concrete compression was installed on the 20th and 35th floors of the building. The building has been nicknamed "The Calculator" due to its flat shape and windows which look like button pads.

See also 
 List of tallest buildings in Singapore

References

Further reading

External links
 

1976 establishments in Singapore
Brutalist architecture in Singapore
Downtown Core (Singapore)
I. M. Pei buildings
Modernist architecture
Office buildings completed in 1976
Raffles Place
Skyscraper office buildings in Singapore