TITLE: Pearl gourami

The pearl gourami (Trichopodus leerii) is a species of gourami native to Southeast Asia.

Description
These fish reach about  TL. The body is a brownish-silver colour, covered in a pearl-like pattern with a distinct black line running from the fish's head, and gradually thinning towards the caudal fin. This fish's appearance has given rise to many popular names, such as the lace gourami and the mosaic gourami.

Male specimens of this fish, typical of many gouramis, are generally larger and more colourful than their female counterparts. They exhibit bright orange colouring around the throat region, which at breeding time becomes much brighter and is used to court the female. Males also exhibit somewhat of an orange tinge in their fins, with the exception of the caudal (tail) fin. The male also has longer fins, with a more pointed dorsal fin and extended anal fin rays.

Distribution and habitat
The pearl gourami is native to Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia (where it is found on the islands of Sumatra, and Borneo). It occurs in lowland swamps with acidic water. This fish prefers the top and middle levels of the water.

Species description and name
Trichopodus leerii was formally described as Trichopus leerii by the Dutch medical doctor and ichthyologist Pieter Bleeker in 1852. The type was collected at Palembang in Sumatra by Lieutenant-Colonel J. M. van Leer who was a medical colleague of Bleeker's and whom Bleeker honoured in its specific name.

In the aquarium

Tank requirements
A tank with a volume of 120 litres (30 gallons) or over is generally recommended for a pair of pearl gouramis, although anything above that volume is greatly recommended, since these fish may show signs of stress, abnormal aggression, and illness when confined. Preferred tank temperatures are 22–28°C (72–82F). Tanks with surfaces exposed to fresh, humid air are needed so that the pearl gourami's labyrinth organ can function correctly. As with any tropical aquarium, adequate filtration, lighting, substrate and decorations, plants, and other parts of proper care are required. This fish may be somewhat timid or shy, and should not be kept with fish that are too boisterous or aggressive. In fact, in the first several days or weeks, these fish typically show extreme shyness and timidness, spending a great deal of time hiding, regardless of tank-mates or water properties. If in proper conditions, however, they will outgrow this and become more gregarious, becoming social fish. Although somewhat hardy, pearl gouramis can be vulnerable to disease, so clean water is a must. Many gouramis display bolder behavior when the tank is furnished with plants, decorations, and ornaments which provide safe refuges for the fish in times of stress.

Breeding
The pearl gourami is a bubble nest builder that uses plants to help bind together the bubbles. The water level should be reduced to 20 cm (8 in) during spawning 
, and the temperature should be approximately 28 °C (82 °F) and with a pH of around 7. After spawning both adults cannot be kept together. The eggs hatch after two days and the fry become free swimming three days later (Ter Morshuizen 2007). When they commence with swimming freely the fry can be fed infusoria and brine shrimp, and a week later finely ground flakes. Freeze-dried tablets may also be fed to older fry. The temperature needs to be high (about 84 °F) and with little or no water movement. Since they are air breathers, filtration is not necessary.

The pearl gourami has a very unusual and beautiful mating dance. The male builds a nest of tiny, durable bubbles. The female takes a position under the nest and the male curves his body tightly around her, from underneath. Her body quivers while she expels a few eggs. Next he releases her and picks up the eggs in his mouth as they are sinking, then he spits them into the bubble nest. This sequence is repeated several times, until the female has laid all of her eggs.

The fry are tiny at hatching (.2 mm or smaller). The male cares for the fry, taking them into his mouth and spitting them back into the nest if they fall out. Some tend to grow faster than others, and will exhibit fratricide, eating their smaller siblings.

References

Pearl gourami
Fish of Southeast Asia
Fish of Thailand
Fish described in 1852
Taxa named by Pieter Bleeker