TITLE: Armstrong & Getty

Armstrong & Getty are the hosts of The Armstrong & Getty Show, a morning drive radio show airing in California, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico, Oregon, Texas, Florida, Alaska, Colorado, Illinois, Iowa, Ohio, Montana, South Carolina, South Dakota, Washington state, and Washington, D.C. on several radio stations owned by iHeartMedia and other broadcasting companies.  The show is hosted by Jack Armstrong and Joe Getty. The talk show format is a mixture of libertarian political commentary, observations on local, national, and international news as well as reflections on social issues presented with humor.

The show
The Armstrong & Getty Show airs live from the studios of 650 KSTE in Sacramento, weekdays 6 to 10 a.m. Pacific Time.  It is also heard in Los Angeles; Las Vegas; San Francisco; San Diego; Portland, Oregon; Reno; Seattle; Tacoma; Palm Springs; Monterey; Salinas; Santa Cruz; Eugene; Salt Lake City; Ventura; Fresno; Fairbanks; Redding; Santa Maria, California; Aspen; Washington, DC; Daytona Beach; Tallahassee; Chicago; Ramsey, Illinois; Ames, Iowa; Cleveland; Great Falls, Montana; Missoula, Montana; Kansas City, Kansas; Greenwood, South Carolina; Myrtle Beach, South Carolina; Florence, South Carolina; Houston; and Sioux Falls, South Dakota. The show won the Best of Sacramento award numerous years in a row.

Doug Stephan incident
On July 28, 2010, Armstrong and Getty were tipped off by a listener that a fellow radio talk show host, Doug Stephan, had been stealing audio material from the Armstrong and Getty show, editing the audio, and using it in his show in an attempt to portray it as if he were speaking to their caller.

During that same broadcast, the hosts were able to speak to Douglas Stephan, himself, regarding the alleged plagiarism that appeared evident upon comparison of the duo's show content and Douglas Stephan's "callers" some days later. Stephen never admitted to the allegations, but apologized, saying that the calls were misplaced and accidentally played on his Good Day show.

References

External links
 

American talk radio programs