TITLE: SFC Shturmi

SFC Sturmi is a Georgian football club based in Sartichala. Being one of the youngest domestic teams, they take part in Liga 4, the fourth tier of Georgian league system.

History
On 6 March 2020 some media outlets announced that newly formed FC Shturmi Sartichala would replace FC Sarti Sartichala, dissolved in 2018, and represent the town in Regional league. Tornike Chaduneli, the former Torpedo Kutaisi defender and Sarti manager, took charge of the team.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the season was suspended until August, when a single-round competition between 14 clubs of Group D East began.

Being debutants in the Georgian league, the club from the very outset displayed an attacking football which greatly contributed to thrashing some rivals. By mid-season with the seven matches behind Shturmi had won five of them with a large margin and reached an astonishing 31:5 aggregate goal difference.

In mid-October the team was placed in a two-week COVID quarantine. Straight after the games were resumed, Shturmi set their own record by winning 12–0. Until the final game week the club kept beating all other opponents, although so did Dinamo-2 Tbilisi who, apart from the same winning run, had a better goal advantage. The decisive tie was supposed to determine a winner of the league group with promotion to Liga 4.

The match on 20 December in Sartichala drew a great interest among the cheering locals who, unable to get inside the ground, gathered around it. Shturmi took the lead after ten minutes with Dinamo equalizing five minutes later. Numerous attempts to break the well-defending rivals reached a dramatic end in stoppage time when the hosts were awarded a penalty kick. However, goalkeeper Omar Migineishvili saved it and with final score 1-1 Shturmi were denied a victory.

In late January 2021 Georgian Football Federation decided to enlarge Liga 4 at the expense of all four second-placed Regionuli Liga clubs from the previous season with Shturmi being among these promoted teams.

The start in the fourth tier was less impressive. However, the team drastically improved in the second stage, won ten games, including with 7-0 and 9-0, and prevailed in the final match of the season with a 12-0 victory.

Seasons

Players
As of April 2021

(C)

Stadium

Shturmi play home games at Central stadium in Sartichala, which is due to undergo  major reconstruction works according to an electronic tender, announced in January 2021. For this reason the team hosted all their Liga 4 rivals at Sagarejo football ground.

Name

SFC stands for Sartichala Football Club while Georgian word shturmi can be translated as assault.

External links
 Page on Facebook

References

Football clubs in Georgia (country)
2020 establishments in Georgia (country)
Association football clubs established in 2020